They need to know that when they're
morbidly obese, they need to be in a
calorie deficit for a long time. Not
probably took them 10 or 20 years to get
to that body weight. It might take them
10 years to march it all the way back to
a healthy weight. Uh and that's that
expectation needs to be set. Now, they
can be aggressive about it and they can
cut that time down, but the difficulty
is going to be profound.
[Music]
Hi, my name is John Jish. I'm a doctor
of biomedical engineering and I have a
unique perspective on a lot of things.
nutrition, exercise, science, sports
performance, elite athletes, and how to
get from one of those categories to the
other, especially if you don't easily
grow muscle. That's what my my favorite
subject. But today, I want to talk about
specifically look at a clip from the
documentary about The Biggest Loser.
It's now on Netflix. And there's one
issue that they brought up multiple
times in the show
about damaging your metabolism. So, here
I'm going to I'm going to play the clip
and then react to it.
>> Well, I just woke up and um got on the
scale and um
I'm freaked out because I'm 340 lb. I
didn't know I was that heavy. I thought
I was about 300 and uh I hadn't weighed
in about a month and I hadn't really
been watching my diet too well and um
I'm just a little distraught that I'm
that heavy because I'm I'm less than 100
lbs of where I started on The Biggest
Loser.
I looked at some of the people from two,
three, four seasons behind me and they
had gained a lot of the weight back. We
were gaining weight while we were even
working out and we knew something was
up.
>> Biggest Loser bombshell. It's all part
of a new diet study first reported in
the New York Times.
>> In a recent study, a group of scientists
followed 14 of the 16 contestants from
one season of The Biggest Loser. They
found that all but one of them gained
the weight back. Four of them even
reported being heavier now than at the
beginning of the show.
>> I did read that article and it doesn't
surprise me.
Losing a lot of weight is a difficult
thing to do. Most people fail at it and
and they fail at it because if you
approach it like it's something you're
going to do temporarily, a diet or a
show where you're literally exercising
all day in between crying in a fetal
position and maybe some meals that are
very unsatisfactory. Okay, that's not a
sustainable lifestyle. And the problem
is if you're going to succeed, you need
a lifestyle
change.
When people watch me walking down the
street,
they know what I eat. Like when you look
at me, I'm, you know, kind of a wall of
muscle and it's like, okay, you eat a
lot of Twinkies? I don't get that
question. They know I eat steak. They
know I probably take uh probably take
care of my nutrition. I'm probably doing
all the healthy things, which is true. I
am doing all of the healthy things. Um,
and I think some people will ask
because they're hopeful about my answer.
Hey, you know, like what are your cheat
meals like? And I go, the problem is
when you have a cheat meal, you're only
cheating yourself. And um I've been my
own worst enemy many days of my life.
And I figured out that the guy
sabotaging me is always me. I want to
say this with compassion because I feel
bad for these people. They went and lost
a bunch of weight, went through torture,
kind of humiliated themselves. You know,
you're they're there with their shirt
off and they're, you know, they're extra
body mass just kind of hanging all over
the place. And then when the show's
over, they all they put the weight back
on. Most most of these people put the
weight back on. And I did read the study
and the study claimed that if you lose
weight too fast, you damage your
metabolism.
Uh and then you won't be able to lose
weight. I've got great news for you.
That's a croc of That is not true.
You cannot damage your metabolism.
That's almost as stupid as when people
are saying, "Oh, you're not losing
weight. It's because you're not eating
enough."
What? That's ludicrous. And so is this
damaging damaging the metabolism. And I
think part of the issue here is as
people are losing weight and Menoh
Henzelman's has discussed this at great
length and if you want to find his
videos on it, I recommend it. In fact,
I'll probably drop them in the comments.
What happens is let's say you weigh 400
lb and you know you have a basal
metabolic rate plus activity that you're
calculating for your calories. Most
people still go by calories. Uh, and
there's not a better system of
measurement. And in my previous videos,
I have explained how dumb calories are
because the way we find out how many
calories are in something is we light it
on fire. Literally light it on fire. Uh,
which is not what your body does. So, I
I don't know why we're still using that,
but like I said, we don't have a better
system. So, somebody gets to 400 lb,
they're maybe eating 5, 6,000 calories a
day on average.
When they lose 100 lb, are they lowering
the amount of calories that they're
taking in based on a percentage deficit
from their original body weight or their
adjusted body weight? I can promise you,
they're doing it from the their
original. You have to keep recalculating
that
because you want it to be accurate. If
if all of a sudden you were 400 and now
300 and you want to keep losing weight,
well now you got to redo the calculation
because you're now 300 lb. So you got to
find out what your basil metabolic rate
is and then estimates on your activity
and then
do a deficit from that point
which is often forgotten. So
uh the and I read the paper and the
paper was suggesting the damage of
metabolism and there are a a plethora of
other papers that indicate that this is
not and I'll I'll show you some of those
but we really need to
spread this message. So share this video
with anybody that you have enough
rapport with who's overweight that you
could share something like this and they
wouldn't be mad at you. So if you've got
like a BFF and they ask you, hey, you
know, can you help me? I need some
advice on like how to lose body fat,
share this with them because they've
already asked you for help. If they
didn't ask for help, you got to kind of
wait for them to ask for help because uh
it's a sensitive subject.
Weight is one of those things where
if you bring it up, you're almost
calling the person unattractive, which
is like a really hard thing for most
people to hear and often don't want to
hear it. So, you got to wait for them to
bring it up, but uh this will help them.
They need to know that when they're
morbidly obese, they need to be in a
calorie deficit for a long time. Not
probably took them 10 or 20 years to get
to that body weight. It might take them
10 years to march it all the way back to
a healthy weight. Uh and that's that
expectation needs to be set. Now, they
can be aggressive about it and they can
cut that time down, but the difficulty
is going to be profound.
And again, share this video because
everybody who needs to hear it needs to
know
just how significant these challenges
are. And uh and and you know another
another point of
of fact is now that we have the GLP-1
agonists which I support like are there
problems associated with them? Yeah, the
problems are actually associated with
diabetes not the the peptides but it's a
different world now and we have a better
option
and that's part of the equation. So
lifestyle change still needed.
Prioritizing protein still needed.
Maybe a GOP agonist for those who are
very obese or just looking to change
what fitness people often refer to as
the set point, which is basically where
your body has been accustomed to sitting
from a body fat perspective. So when
people start to lose body fat, there is
a bias that the body has to try and get
back there only because you were there
for so long. It seems like that is
homeostasis.
So what you want to do is get leaner and
then stay there. And the longer you stay
there, the easier it is to maintain that
because that becomes the new
homeostasis.
So, I just threw a lot of information at
you guys and I think some people that
are looking to lose some extreme amount
of body fat, you might want to watch
this video three or four times and take
notes. This is really important. And the
the biggest thing I want to push here is
do not lose hope. You cannot damage your
metabolism. Don't listen to the people
that are saying that. They're confused.
They're not stupid. They're just they're
they're wrong. And don't be mad at wrong
people. You can find what they say
frustrating, but don't be angry with
them. Just know that based on everything
I've told you here, you can be healthy
again. I hope this helps. Leave a
comment. If you think I'm wrong about
something, tell me. And uh maybe it'll
spark another video. Thanks. See you on
the next one. If this video helped you,
I want you to subscribe and follow. I'm
going to put out videos on a regular
basis. I think they're going to help a
whole lot of people, especially if
you're one of those people that doesn't
just instantly grow from lifting regular
weights. We've got the answer for you.